Common rules from the CallerLab "Basic and Mainstream Definitions"
document


Passing Rule

If the definition of a call has two dancers on the same path and
requires them to walk past each other, they should pass right
shoulders (unless otherwise specified) and continue. The mirror image
version of a call has dancers pass left shoulders and continue (for
example, Left Double Pass Thru).


Same Position Rule

If two dancers are required to occupy the same position at the end of
a call, and are facing in opposite directions from each other, they
form a Right-Hand Mini-Wave. If an adjustment is necessary (since they
are now two dancers side-by-side in a formation that expected one
dancer), the adjustment is sideways, towards the outside of the group
in which they were working.

Callers should not use a call that would result in two dancers who are
facing the same direction, or at right angles, trying to occupy the
same position.


Facing Couples Rule

A few specific calls that are defined to start from an Ocean Wave are
also proper starting from Facing Couples. Examples include Swing Thru
and Spin The Top. In these cases, the dancers first step into a
momentary Right-Hand Ocean Wave and complete the call.

If the caller directs a left hand call (e.g., Left Swing Thru), the
dancers first step into a momentary Left-Hand Ocean Wave.

If the Facing Couples rule is applicable, the call's definition will
have a comment to that effect. If there is no such comment, then the
Facing Couples rule may not be used.

While the rule is called the Facing Couples Rule, it is generalized to
include Facing Dancers stepping to a Right- Hand Mini-Wave and Facing
Lines step to a Right-Hand Tidal Wave, etc.

The following types of mixed Mini-Wave and Facing Dancer starting
formations, while unusual, are also proper:

<DIAGRAM>

Application of the Facing Couple Rule does not change the timing of
the call.


Ocean Wave Rule

Some calls that are defined to start from Facing Couples are also
proper starting from a Right-Hand Ocean Wave. Examples include Right
And Left Thru and Square Thru. In these cases, the dancers have
already stepped forward toward the facing dancer and are ready to
complete the remaining action of the directed call.

For the sake of dancer comprehension and teaching purposes, it may be
necessary initially to have the dancers back up into facing couples,
then step back into the wave and complete the call.

While the rule is called the Ocean Wave Rule, it is generalized to
include Mini-Wave (Facing Dancers) and Tidal Wave (Facing Lines),
etc. Examples include Pass Thru, Slide Thru, Box The Gnat, and Double
Pass Thru (from a Right-Hand 1/4 Tag), and Pass To The Center (from
Right-Hand Ocean Waves).

In order for the Ocean Wave Rule to apply, the initial dance action of
the call must start with a Box The Gnat, Pass Thru, or Right Pull
By. In addition, the call must not be defined to have a different
dance action from an Ocean Wave. For example, the call Circulate is
defined from Eight Chain Thru and from Ocean Waves. It would be
improper to call Circulate from Ocean Waves and expect dancers to
dance it as a Step Thru based on the Ocean Wave Rule because they
would naturally apply the definition of Circulate from Ocean Waves.

The following mixed Mini-Wave and Facing Dancer starting formation,
while unusual, is also proper:

<DIAGRAM>

The adjustment that is part of the Ocean Wave Rule does not change the
effect of the call. It neither adds nor subtracts parts or changes the
use of fractions. It is as if any dancer in a mini-wave had first
stepped back into facing dancers and then all did the call. For
example, from a Right-Hand Mini-Wave Dosado ends in Facing Dancers,
not in a Right-Hand Mini-Wave.

The Ocean Wave Rule also applies to calls that normally start from
Facing Couples when the dancers are in a Left Hand Ocean Wave. In
these cases, the caller must direct a left hand call (e.g., Left
Square Thru). See "Additional Detail: Commands: Extensions like
Reverse Wheel Around".

When half of the dancers are in a Mini-Wave, and the other half of the
dancers are Facing Dancers, and the call is a 2-dancer call (e.g., Box
The Gnat, Slide Thru, Pass Thru) the caller should make clear who is
to do the call (e.g., Everyone or Those Facing).

Timing: Application of the Ocean Wave Rule does not change the timing
of the call.

